CORE-1032: (OBI) Refactor OBI manager to signal-aware views supporting network+stats metrics (#5164)
odigos-io/odigos: docs/snippets/shared/pipeline/rules/networkmetrics.mdx

The **Network Metrics** rule enables network flow metrics and TCP stats metrics for matching workloads. These metrics are collected in odiglet and exported over OTLP alongside other workload telemetry.

Learn more about the underlying collectors and metric families in the [OBI instrumentation guide](/oss/instrumentations/obi).

## Considerations

<Warning>
  Before enabling **network metrics**, please note the following:
  - Enable the cluster infrastructure in Helm by setting `metricsSources.networkMetrics.enabled` to `true` (it defaults to disabled).
</Warning>

## Configuration Options

<AccordionGroup>
  <Accordion title="networkMetrics">
    **networkMetrics** `object` : Enable network flow and TCP stats metrics for scoped workloads. Setting this field (even as an empty object `{}`) enables collection; omit it to leave metrics disabled.

>     - This field is *optional*

Reviewer: It might be optional, but if unset the network metrics will not be enabled.
not sure if this statement adds any info here

Author: true

The **Network Metrics** rule enables network flow metrics and TCP stats metrics for instrumented workloads. These metrics are collected in odiglet and exported over OTLP alongside other workload telemetry.

Learn more about the underlying collectors and metric families in the [OBI instrumentation guide](/oss/instrumentations/obi).

## Considerations

<Warning>
  Before enabling **network metrics**, please note the following:

>   - Network flow collection requires odiglet to run with `hostNetwork`. Enable the cluster infrastructure in Helm by setting `metricsSources.networkMetrics.disabled` to `false` (it defaults to `true`).

Reviewer: would be so much cleaner if reversed

```suggestion
  - Network flow collection requires odiglet to run with `hostNetwork`. Enable the cluster infrastructure in Helm by setting `metricsSources.networkMetrics.enabled` to `true`
```

The spec we are using is [the otel one](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/configuration/sdk-environment-variables/#boolean):

> All Boolean environment variables SHOULD be named and defined such that false is the expected safe default behavior

>   - Network metrics apply to processes on a node that Odigos has successfully instrumented. The workload must have agent injection enabled.

Reviewer: This is a limitation we can later relex, right? as we can use network metrics for any process, not necessarily those that are already setup for instrumentation, right?

Author: yes with the middleware approach that requirement is no longer

>   - Network metrics apply to processes on a node that Odigos has successfully instrumented. The workload must have agent injection enabled.

Reviewer: I think that for users, a phrase like 

> The workload must have agent injection enabled

is too technical and might not be clear for most people.

How about ?

```suggestion
  - Network metrics apply to processes on a node that Odigos has successfully instrumented. They are collected for all selected sources when odigos instrumentation agent is supported
```

>   - Network metrics add eBPF overhead on host interfaces. Scope rules to specific workloads when possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Network metrics add eBPF overhead on host interfaces. Scope rules to specific sources when possible.
```

</Warning>

<Note>
  TCP stats metrics are enabled together with network flow metrics when this rule is enabled. Stats metrics do not require `hostNetwork`, but network flow metrics do.

> </Note>

Reviewer: Users reading from top to bottom will see this and not understand what `hostNetwork` is and why they should care. consider if we need this as a note so far up in this page.

also consider using a table to specify each metrics family and if it requires hostNetwork `true`/`false` I think it will be clearer this way

Author: actually now that we're just bundling them together network metrics all require hostnetwork

<Info>
  Create `InstrumentationRule` resources in the Odigos installation namespace (typically `odigos-system`). Rules in other namespaces are not picked up by Odigos.
</Info>

## Configuration Options

<AccordionGroup>
  <Accordion title="networkMetrics">
    **networkMetrics** `object` : Enable network flow and TCP stats metrics for scoped workloads.
    - This field is *optional*
    <AccordionGroup>
      <Accordion title="enabled">
        **enabled** `boolean` : When `true`, network flow and TCP stats metrics collection is enabled for matching instrumented processes.
        - This field is *required* when `networkMetrics` is set

>       </Accordion>

Reviewer: There are 7 other rules which are enabled just be setting them in a rule object, and does not have an `enabled`/`disabled` property.

I would love to change the other 2 so we are consistent in this format, and avoid adding it to new ones.

Author: ah I did not realize the majority in my other reply https://github.com/odigos-io/odigos/pull/5164#discussion_r3544416858
makes sense

    </AccordionGroup>
  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

<Note>

>   Multiple rules merge with OR semantics: if any matching rule enables network metrics, they are enabled for that workload.

Reviewer: It is actually called `sourceScope` but works in container level. it will be more accurate to say

```suggestion
  Multiple rules merge with OR semantics: if any matching rule enables network metrics, they are enabled for that source/languages.
```

WDYT?

Author: sounds good to me

</Note>

## Cluster infrastructure for network flow metrics

> Network flow metrics require odiglet `hostNetwork`. Configure this once at the cluster level in Helm:

Reviewer: Not sure if all users will understand what `hostNetwork` mean and can be confused. also - as a user reading this, I would ask myself "are there are any implications or considerations for enabling `hostNetwork`?" or "how can I tell if this can work in my cluster?"

consider adding some actionable instructions if you have any

Author: added some more description and a link to the k8s docs on hostnetwork pod setting

## Basic Example

The following example enables network metrics cluster-wide for all instrumented workloads.

<Steps>
  <Step title="Enable network metrics infrastructure">
    Set `metricsSources.networkMetrics.disabled` to `false` in your Odigos Helm values and upgrade the release.
  </Step>
  <Step title="Create the InstrumentationRule">
    Create a YAML file with the following content:

    ```yaml network-metrics.yaml
    apiVersion: odigos.io/v1alpha1
    kind: InstrumentationRule
    metadata:
      name: network-metrics
      namespace: odigos-system
    spec:
      ruleName: "Network metrics"
      networkMetrics:
        enabled: true
    ```
  </Step>
  <Step title="Apply the rule">
    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f network-metrics.yaml
    ```
  </Step>
  <Step title="Verify the rule merged into InstrumentationConfig">
    After the instrumentor reconciles, matching workloads should show `networkMetrics` enabled under `spec.containers[].metrics`:

    ```shell
    kubectl get instrumentationconfig -A
    kubectl get instrumentationconfig <workload-ic-name> -n <namespace> -o yaml | grep -A10 'metrics:'

>     ```

Reviewer: Not sure if it's something we want to suggest in our docs, as it's implementation detail and might not be straight forward.

we can consider a troubleshooting section maybe below?

Author: nah this was ai docs getting over excited, removed

>     If pods were running before the rule was applied, restart them so odiglet re-attaches metrics collection for their processes.

Reviewer: we can consider a more positive phrasing:

```suggestion
    network metrics collection will run on any new pod created after the rule is applied. existing pods will not be affected and requires a restart to initiate metrics collection.  
```

Author: 👍
